It is December 3, 1987.
I'm in Boston to interview the playwright Arthur Miller at the Ritz-Falb.
I've already done a little test on this, so I know it's fine.
Okay, I guess I type up my questions.
That's the best.
I can't read my own writing.
I think the structure of this book, and you have been quoted someplace, I don't know where, but that you kind of
followed a similar structure as you did as a salesman, and that memory is considerably more important than chronology, and the title seems to indicate that, too.
Maybe you could just tell me a little bit about that.
Well, it's the same structure as Death of the Fall, actually.
But it's, uh... I don't think that time has any place in recollection.
We don't recall things.
in relation to time.
You recall them by virtue of their relation between one image and another.
You recall because one thing obviously suggests another, rather than having anything to do with time.
So, time is squeezed out of the book, in that sense.
It's things more than... Yeah.
It's relationships.
Relationships.
So I obeyed that rule.
This has been more or less a guiding principle through all your work, I gather.
That's right.
I've been bending time a lot.
And the title comes out of the, obviously, the structure.
Did you have the title before you had the structure?
Oh, no, no.
I didn't get that, so I was almost finished with the book, and suddenly it seems to me to be
What is it about death, death of a salesman?
And I've written this sentence, and I'll just read it, that has resonated so powerfully over the past 28 years or so.
What do we see in Lily's life that continues to move us so, that continues to speak to us?
And it's an extraordinary phenomenon, this play.
It is more than a play, I think.
Maybe you can just tell me something about that.
You know, I think it may just be that it's a one thing, it's a certain total embrace of a situation in a man that's really kind in anything.
It's himself as a person, as a private person, as a father, as a lover, as a husband, as a man in society.
in business, as a son himself, as a brother.
Practically every side of his existence is in that place, and it's dramatizing.
There's something magical about it.
Any member of your colleagues have attempted to get any of those qualities into a play?
absolutely total onslaught on December.
But whether they did or not, I don't know the answer to the question.
I think if we could answer the question, it probably wouldn't exist anymore.
Don't leave it, don't touch it.
I heard an interview that you gave here some months back, and somebody asked you, have you ever thought of rewriting these things?
And I said, my God, what a thing to ask them.
It's a silly question.
It's a silly question, isn't it?
I mean, I didn't even tend to—I was kind of— Well, they used to—I think it comes out of this dreadful habit that we have now of what they call updating something.
In other words, you think because you put a different costume on Hamlet that it's going to change something.
Of course, it doesn't do anything but make the director look a little classy, which is just a dumb question.
The point is human nature remains the same.
I mean, why does Camelot resonate today?
Because the human condition is the same today as it was in the 16th century.
I've read your short stories.
I enjoy them.
I've read your novel.
I've read your prose.
You are a man of letters.
You're adept in many forms, and that you are a man of the theater.
Why?
Why do you choose?
Well, I think it's partly... Let me just finish.
It's double-pronged.
Particularly when you consider the state of the theater, in this country at least, as it is today.
Two questions, basically.
Of course, I might not have been a man of the theater.
I haven't played any of the conditioners today.
It's...
It's been betrayed in so many ways now that it barely breathes air.
And when I came into it, I thought it was bad enough, but I never dreamed it would get to this.
So, if I am a man in the theater, it's because there was a theater of some kind.
There was a profession of the theater.
And one felt it was putting your life into it.
I'm not sure if it's true anymore in this country.
It is true in other countries, but not here.
But writing plays, what does that exercise do for you to say that writing stories does it?
It's just what used to be called an event.
It's the way my mind was formed.
I think a playwright is, at least in some part, an actor.
An actor, Manquet, he's an actor who forbids himself to act, or wants to act all the parts, or projects himself through dialogue.
Let's say you could call it a deformation of the mind.
That's the way one thinks, in terms of scenes.
rather than in terms of the descriptions.
I have thought that way since I began thinking.
You mentioned at some point in the book the writing of dialogue.
Either you have it or you don't, and there has to be a knack.
I can't recall it for such words, but you have to have this knack of knowing that it's going to work on a stage.
So many of us can write beautiful words that may read well, but to be spoken.
There is a mystery about it, but the only thing I can tell you about it is that usually a stage-worthy line invites the audience to complete it somehow, to complete the image.
The best theater is the theater that invokes the imagination of the viewer of the audience.
And it's a difficult art because there's a question of how much to tell them, how much they should be asked to work at it.
And a line, a good dramatic line, may say a lot, but it also leaves out a lot.
And I can't be any more specific with that.
The narrative dialogue obviously doesn't work.
It doesn't have a kick whether your dramatic dialogue does.
You mentioned that you invite the audience to participate in the process.
You've also spoken about the film process, which perhaps goes too far.
Death of a Salesman is a work of art.
The set, The House of the Skeleton.
But when the film version, the recent film version was done, there was a problem there of being too realistic, of going beyond the authority.
I thought it came closest to achieving that in the film, in this last four-round.
creating a set which was not really real.
It's important for you that it not be entirely real, I think, is what I'm writing in.
Well, the thing is, you see, the play is, I'm happy to say, gives people real emotions.
It evokes real emotions.
We have to bring our own baggage to it, apparently.
But the truth of the matter is that the dialogue is not paper-corded with dialogue.
But it takes good actors to realize that.
And the actors know it best.
So that the seeming realism of the play is created by a very highly condensed, highly selective use of language, which is not realistic speaking.
Well, if there were a realist experience, the play would be seven hours long.
That's right.
You mentioned that after the extraordinary success of Salesman for a while, you felt blocked.
How did you overcome this?
Did you ever truly overcome it after such an experience?
You certainly were productive.
The most produced play I've ever written, I wrote right after that.
It's just impressive.
It's been produced more often.
Twice as much, at least.
It's my most famous play.
Can you explain that?
Well, sure.
That's a wonderful play, and I know the play very well.
There's a lot of places that you're thinking.
I've got a play out in London now that many people think is my best play.
So the baloney about being blocked is... I don't remember that.
You expressed some apprehension about, how do I follow this?
Maybe I'm using the wrong word, blocked, but apprehension... Would you like to think that some of your best work is still ahead of you?
Well, I think this book is among my best books.
I love this book, by the way.
My wife told me this morning when we were discussing it.
She said, I get it now.
But again, this is a memoir.
I mean best work in terms of dramatic work.
Who knows?
You're working on some things.
You're always writing a poem.
I've just written a film.
It was called Almost Everybody Runs.
And we'll keep going to production this spring.
And I'm working on a play now.
You work every day I guess?
Yeah.
Seven days a week usually.
There's no shortage of ideas?
Not yet.
You've been described as an autobiographical playwright.
Fair assessment?
You mean I lived in 1692?
You mean I was a long shaman?
Well, uh... You mean I... Again we say, again we say, again... I lived in southern France.
Again we say, however, again, however, we say that human nature is timeless, transcends... These are meaningless statements.
Right.
What I'm saying.
I have written more plays about more scenes of different people maybe than most
This son of Vichy is about the Jews of Southern France.
I love the words.
I can't remember.
This is about Italian martial.
The crucible is about Germans in 1692.
All my sons are about a manufacturer.
But the Crucible spoke for a time, though, didn't it?
I mean, it spoke for all time.
I mean, not only for 1692, it also spoke for 1852, I think.
What is the opposite of it?
I tell you, we haven't even been in here.
We're trying to do an interview, and I think the vacuum might... I won't be able to get anything on the tape record.
I'm sorry.
We have hardly walked into it.
Yeah, those are, again, those are tags that lazy journalists use.
Forgive me.
Well, that's not my assessment.
I read it in the New York Times.
Yeah, well, they're as lazy as anybody else.
No, it isn't true.
It's no more true than about anybody else.
Well, does it offend you when you see that?
No, it just seems silly.
It's a pointless statement to make, because anybody who writes any number of works...
of course, using his experience.
You mentioned in time bands that you had any number of models, for instance, for Willie.
So many would like to say that the uncle was the model.
You say, I don't think the man spoke more than 200 words in his life.
I tell you, the problem is, you see, that most people can't imagine creating anything.
So they think that a writer is a reporter.
That's the problem.
And so they go looking for the model as though the work were nothing but some kind of a report that he made of an event, which is perfectly okay.
I mean, there have been great books written about actual events.
Dostoevsky used to write out of newspaper clippings.
There's nothing wrong with it.
It's just that it doesn't happen to be.
I'm fascinated, though, by the father-son relationship that you have written about.
Perhaps you could tell me about your particular fascination for that case.
Well, again, I am pretty much sticking to the writing, by the way, because the other personal stuff is fascinating, but that's in the book.
Well, the Father and Son thing, again, is central to my work, but it also doesn't exist in about half of the place.
I said, well, I didn't say all, but I said it is a theme.
Well, it's not in the crucible, it's not in looking for the bridge, it's not in the conservatory, it's not in numerous places.
It happens to be the main theme in The Death of the Seldom, but when I were all right about it.
And that goes to play, but thereafter I left it behind.
That's about forty years ago.
There's a beautifully written line which is, I have to say my favorite section of the book is that
I love them all, but I particularly like that section where you're describing the creation of Death of the Civil, the writing of it, the staging of it, the reception of it, how it changed you as a personality, or the perception of you as a personality.
You say that how I was and how I was perceived to be were two different things.
Perhaps you could explain a little bit of that to me.
How did you differ from the perception?
Well, it's just like any other thing.
I'd had a lot of success before with a play that in fact opened here, one of my sons, and that too had changed my life in the sense that I was then able to call upon the theater that produced my stuff, whereas before I couldn't.
So that makes a big difference.
You know, you come to a point where you have a certain amount of clout, and it means you're free to try new things.
That's what happened out of All My Sons.
I could not have written death myself had I not had a successful All My Sons.
You also mentioned that All My Sons was the last shot, by the way, I guess.
Right.
Well, I'd written about ten plays by that time, and I'd had no great success with any of them.
So, I wouldn't want to sit around waiting the rest of my life.
I could write prose, and I would go become a prose writer.
And, indeed, after Nathaniel, another play early, I'd write a novel called
But I have a copy of it here.
Well, that came out of the theater of the play, actually.
So I don't know.
It just makes you freer.
It gives you the right to experiment, which the salesman was.
And after the salesman, I could then turn to another poem.
In short, it means freedom, if you use it right.
You create characters, memorable characters.
So many of today's playwrights don't.
Is there an explanation for that?
I don't know.
of some autonomous human being is strange to a lot of people.
I often wonder whether the theater is reflecting a feeling in the public that characters don't matter anymore.
That we're so predetermined as to what we're going to do.
that psychology is boring and boring, and it really doesn't matter what you think or what you feel.
What matters is what the social circumstance is, what your job is, what you have to do, and what you're forbidden to do by your job.
So, what we're getting is a reflection back from the stage and from the movies of what we really feel.
That would be pretty awful, but I often wonder whether that's the case.
They're just describing men as he really thinks he is.
Are you inside the theater today or outside of it?
Do you feel an outsider?
No, the truth is I've never felt that I was the inside of it.
I've always been on the outside, and I don't regret that.
I mean, most of the plays I've written have been rejected when they're first performed.
Rejected?
You'd be rejected by some critics.
By critics, yeah.
There's another question that I'd like to get to before you get into that.
Actually, All My Sons would have closed shortly after it opened in New York, except for one critic, Brooks Atkinson on New York.
And had he not put up a fight for it, I don't think it would have run a month.
But a fight meaning go buy the ticket or it's not close.
Well, he wrote about four essays about it.
Not every Sunday, but like four.
He championed it, in other words.
Right.
And he beat down the opposition to it.
But without that, and without his belief in me,
I doubt that I would have had any success.
Can you explain this?
Why do you tend to baffle some critics, and yet you speak to audiences?
I don't know.
That's for them to say.
There is a tradition of criticism, I guess, in this country, which is very much unlike what you would find, say, in Great Britain.
That's true.
Yeah.
They seem more knowledgeable.
I tell you what, our criticism on the whole, our tradition is to look at theater as a purely private, as a place for private relationships.
And where society enters in, it becomes
or man as a social animal, which manifestly is and has always been.
There's something anaesthetic in that to me.
Don't ask me why, but it is.
It's not only in America, but for a long time, until the mid-50s in England, except for someone like George Bernard Shaw, who was
I have the other one.
And that was their tradition until the mid-'50s, when they
So it still exists.
It's still a factor with us.
This might sound like a foolish question, but it's certainly baffled a lot of people.
We're changing gears now entirely.
Shakespeare never published his plays, never thought enough about them to publish them.
This says something about a playwright creating for performance only, talking about one of the great geniuses.
I'd just throw that out as a statement.
Of course, if the play is not a performance.
The two hours traffic of our stage, I mean, is this it?
This is an ephemeral experience, I guess is what I'm asking about here.
Well, it is basically that.
It's got to be that, or it's nothing.
It's literary pretensions are definitely secondary.
It's got to work as a play before it can be called a play, and before it will have any life.
It's good stuff, I just want to make sure I'm getting it.
But you as a playwright can perhaps feel a bit of what Shakespeare might have felt, that the publication of these things was perhaps irrelevant.
In one sense, the only point to it is that people who like to read plays, and there are not many, can have access to them, and other actors who want them can have them.
But one place is now circulated fairly well.
Much more than they did when I started out.
All the sales that have been published about many millions of copies by this time.
And the Crucible has had enormous sales as a published one.
I'm just going to switch this tape.
going out of sight.